README.md, before:

# 🎂 Birthday Reminder Telegram Bot

<p align="center">
  <img src="https://img.shields.io/badge/Python-3.10-blue.svg">
  <img src="https://img.shields.io/badge/License-MIT-green.svg">
  <img src="https://img.shields.io/badge/Platform-Telegram-blue.svg">
  <img src="https://img.shields.io/badge/Docker-Ready-blue.svg">
</p>

Never miss a birthday again! Birthday Reminder Bot is a Telegram bot that helps you keep track of birthdays and sends timely reminders. Born out of a personal need after missing a best friend's birthday, this bot ensures you'll always remember important dates.

## 🌟 Features

- 📝 Store birthdays with or without birth years
- ⏰ Customizable reminder settings (0, 1, 3, or 7 days before)
- 💾 Automatic backup system
- 🌍 Supports multiple date formats
- 🔒 Private data storage for each user
- 🌙 Smart notification system (only sends during daytime)
- 🐳 Docker support for easy deployment

## 🚀 Getting Started

### Prerequisites

- Python 3.10 or higher
- Docker (optional)
- Telegram Bot Token (get it from [@BotFather](https://t.me/botfather))

### Installation

1. Clone the repository:

```bash
git clone https://github.com/Nikfilk2030/birthday_reminder_bot.git
cd birthday_reminder_bot
```

2. Install dependencies:

```bash
pip install -r requirements.txt
```

3. Create and configure your `.env` file:

```bash
TELEGRAM_BOT_TOKEN=your_bot_token_here
PRESTABLE_TELEGRAM_BOT_TOKEN=your_prestable_bot_token_here
```

**Note:** The `PRESTABLE_TELEGRAM_BOT_TOKEN` is optional and only needed if you plan to use the prestable testing environment.

4. Choose your preferred deployment method:

#### Using Docker (Recommended)

```bash
docker compose up --build
```

#### Manual Installation

```bash
./start.sh
```

## 🧪 Prestable Testing Environment

The bot includes a prestable testing environment to safely test changes before deploying to production.

### Setting up Prestable

1. **Create a separate test bot** with [@BotFather](https://t.me/botfather):
   - Use `/newbot` command
   - Choose a different name (e.g., "My Birthday Bot Test")
   - Save the token as `PRESTABLE_TELEGRAM_BOT_TOKEN` in your `.env` file

2. **Run in prestable mode:**

```bash
# Run with Docker
./start.sh --prestable

# Run without Docker
./start.sh --prestable --no-docker

# Get help
./start.sh --help
```

### Prestable Features

- **🔒 Isolated Database**: Uses `data_prestable.db` instead of production `data.db`
- **🧪 Safe Testing**: Test new features without affecting production data
- **🔄 Automatic Backups**: Creates backups before each startup
- **🚀 Easy Switching**: Switch between production and prestable with simple flags

### Available Start Options

```bash
./start.sh                    # Production mode with Docker
./start.sh --prestable        # Prestable mode with Docker
./start.sh --no-docker        # Production mode without Docker
./start.sh --prestable --no-docker  # Prestable mode without Docker
```

## 💡 Usage

### Basic Commands

- `/start` - Initialize the bot and see available commands
- `/register_birthday` - Add a new birthday
- `/delete_birthday` - Remove one or more birthdays by specifying their IDs separated by commas (e.g., "1, 2, 3")
- `/backup` - Get a list of all saved birthdays
- `/register_backup` - Set up automatic backups
- `/unregister_backup` - Disable automatic backups

### Group Chat Support

The Birthday Reminder Bot can also be added to group chats to help manage birthdays collectively. Here's how to set it up:

1. **Add the Bot to a Group Chat:**
   - Open the group chat where you want to add the bot.
   - Tap on the group name at the top to open the group settings.
   - Select "Add Member" and search for your bot by its username.
   - Add the bot to the group.

2. **Set Permissions:**
   - Ensure the bot has the necessary permissions to function correctly:
     - **Send Messages:** The bot needs to send reminders and notifications.
     - **Read Messages:** The bot should be able to read messages to respond to commands.
     - **Manage Messages (optional):** If you want the bot to delete its own messages after a certain period.

3. **Using the Bot in Group Chats:**
   - The bot can register and remind birthdays for all group members.
   - Use the same commands as in private chats to manage birthdays.
   - Ensure that the bot is mentioned in commands if the group settings require it (e.g., `/register_birthday@YourBotUsername`).


### Date Input Formats

The bot accepts various date formats:
- `DD.MM.YYYY` (e.g., 15.06.1990)
- `DD.MM` (e.g., 15.06)
- `DD.MM AGE` (e.g., 15.06 25)

Example:

```
John Doe
15.06.1990
```

### Reminder Settings

Choose when to receive reminders:
- On the birthday (0 days)
- 1 day before
- 3 days before
- 7 days before

## 🛠 Technical Details

### Project Structure

```
birthday_reminder_bot/
├── bot.py # Main bot logic
├── db.py # Database operations
├── utils.py # Utility functions
├── tests.py # Unit tests
├── docker-compose.yml # Docker configuration
├── Dockerfile # Docker build instructions
└── requirements.txt # Python dependencies
```

### Database Schema

The bot uses SQLite with the following main tables:
- `birthdays` - Stores birthday information
- `user_reminder_settings` - User notification preferences
- `backup_ping_settings` - Automatic backup configurations

### Testing

Run the test suite:

```bash
python tests.py
```

## 🔐 Privacy & Security

- All data is stored locally in SQLite databases
- Each user's data is isolated by their chat ID
- No personal information is shared between users
- Automatic log rotation (30 days retention)

## 🤝 Contributing

Contributions are welcome! Here's how you can help:

1. Fork the repository
2. Create your feature branch (`git checkout -b feature/AmazingFeature`)
3. Commit your changes (`git commit -m 'Add some AmazingFeature'`)
4. Push to the branch (`git push origin feature/AmazingFeature`)
5. Open a Pull Request

### Development Setup

1. Install development dependencies:

```bash
pip install black isort flake8
```

2. Use the provided `start.sh` script for development:

```bash
./start.sh
```

## 📝 License

This project is licensed under the MIT License - see the [LICENSE](LICENSE) file for details.

## 🔧 Recent Bug Fixes

### Critical Birthday Reminder Fix (July 2025)

Fixed a critical bug where birthday reminders would stop working after the first year:

- **Problem**: Reminder flags (`was_reminded_X_days_ago`) were never reset, causing reminders to stop permanently after being sent once
- **Solution**: Added automatic flag reset mechanism that runs every 5 minutes
- **Impact**: Ensures birthday reminders continue working year after year
- **Safety**: Added comprehensive tests to prevent similar issues in the future

### Database Backup System

Added robust backup system to protect user data:

- **Automatic Backups**: Created before every bot startup
- **Multiple Formats**: File copy, SQLite backup, and SQL dump
- **Easy Restore**: `python3 backup_db.py restore <backup_file>`

## 🙏 Acknowledgments

- [pyTelegramBotAPI](https://github.com/eternnoir/pyTelegramBotAPI) for the excellent Telegram bot framework
- The open-source community for inspiration and tools

## 📧 Contact

Telegram: [@pchelka_zh](https://t.me/pchelka_zh)

## 🚀 Future Plans

- [ ] Multi-language support
- [ ] Birthday statistics and analytics
- [ ] Export/Import functionality
- [ ] Web interface for management
- [ ] Group birthday notifications

Commit message:

📚 Update README with internationalization features
✅ Added language support section
✅ Updated features list with bilingual capabilities
✅ Documented language switching functionality
✅ Reorganized recent updates section

README.md, after:

# 🎂 Birthday Reminder Telegram Bot

<p align="center">
  <img src="https://img.shields.io/badge/Python-3.10-blue.svg">
  <img src="https://img.shields.io/badge/License-MIT-green.svg">
  <img src="https://img.shields.io/badge/Platform-Telegram-blue.svg">
  <img src="https://img.shields.io/badge/Docker-Ready-blue.svg">
</p>

Never miss a birthday again! Birthday Reminder Bot is a Telegram bot that helps you keep track of birthdays and sends timely reminders. Born out of a personal need after missing a best friend's birthday, this bot ensures you'll always remember important dates.

## 🌟 Features

- 📝 Store birthdays with or without birth years
- ⏰ Customizable reminder settings (0, 1, 3, or 7 days before)
- 💾 Automatic backup system
- 🌍 Supports multiple date formats
- 🔒 Private data storage for each user
- 🌙 Smart notification system (only sends during daytime)
- 🐳 Docker support for easy deployment
- 🇬🇧🇷🇺 Bilingual support (English & Russian)
- 🔄 Instant language switching

## 🚀 Getting Started

### Prerequisites

- Python 3.10 or higher
- Docker (optional)
- Telegram Bot Token (get it from [@BotFather](https://t.me/botfather))

### Installation

1. Clone the repository:

```bash
git clone https://github.com/Nikfilk2030/birthday_reminder_bot.git
cd birthday_reminder_bot
```

2. Install dependencies:

```bash
pip install -r requirements.txt
```

3. Create and configure your `.env` file:

```bash
TELEGRAM_BOT_TOKEN=your_bot_token_here
PRESTABLE_TELEGRAM_BOT_TOKEN=your_prestable_bot_token_here
```

**Note:** The `PRESTABLE_TELEGRAM_BOT_TOKEN` is optional and only needed if you plan to use the prestable testing environment.

4. Choose your preferred deployment method:

#### Using Docker (Recommended)

```bash
docker compose up --build
```

#### Manual Installation

```bash
./start.sh
```

## 🧪 Prestable Testing Environment

The bot includes a prestable testing environment to safely test changes before deploying to production.

### Setting up Prestable

1. **Create a separate test bot** with [@BotFather](https://t.me/botfather):
   - Use `/newbot` command
   - Choose a different name (e.g., "My Birthday Bot Test")
   - Save the token as `PRESTABLE_TELEGRAM_BOT_TOKEN` in your `.env` file

2. **Run in prestable mode:**

```bash
# Run with Docker
./start.sh --prestable

# Run without Docker
./start.sh --prestable --no-docker

# Get help
./start.sh --help
```

### Prestable Features

- **🔒 Isolated Database**: Uses `data_prestable.db` instead of production `data.db`
- **🧪 Safe Testing**: Test new features without affecting production data
- **🔄 Automatic Backups**: Creates backups before each startup
- **🚀 Easy Switching**: Switch between production and prestable with simple flags

### Available Start Options

```bash
./start.sh                    # Production mode with Docker
./start.sh --prestable        # Prestable mode with Docker
./start.sh --no-docker        # Production mode without Docker
./start.sh --prestable --no-docker  # Prestable mode without Docker
```

## 🌍 Language Support

The bot supports both English and Russian languages with seamless switching:

### 🔄 Language Switching
- **🇬🇧🇷🇺 Language Button**: Click the language button in the main menu
- **Persistent Settings**: Your language preference is saved automatically
- **Instant Switching**: Interface updates immediately without restart
- **Complete Translation**: All buttons, messages, and notifications are localized

### 🌟 Supported Languages
- **🇬🇧 English** (Default)
- **🇷🇺 Russian** (Русский)

The bot automatically detects your preference and remembers it for future interactions.

## 💡 Usage

### Basic Commands

- `/start` - Initialize the bot and see available commands
- `/register_birthday` - Add a new birthday
- `/delete_birthday` - Remove one or more birthdays by specifying their IDs separated by commas (e.g., "1, 2, 3")
- `/backup` - Get a list of all saved birthdays
- `/register_backup` - Set up automatic backups
- `/unregister_backup` - Disable automatic backups

### Group Chat Support

The Birthday Reminder Bot can also be added to group chats to help manage birthdays collectively. Here's how to set it up:

1. **Add the Bot to a Group Chat:**
   - Open the group chat where you want to add the bot.
   - Tap on the group name at the top to open the group settings.
   - Select "Add Member" and search for your bot by its username.
   - Add the bot to the group.

2. **Set Permissions:**
   - Ensure the bot has the necessary permissions to function correctly:
     - **Send Messages:** The bot needs to send reminders and notifications.
     - **Read Messages:** The bot should be able to read messages to respond to commands.
     - **Manage Messages (optional):** If you want the bot to delete its own messages after a certain period.

3. **Using the Bot in Group Chats:**
   - The bot can register and remind birthdays for all group members.
   - Use the same commands as in private chats to manage birthdays.
   - Ensure that the bot is mentioned in commands if the group settings require it (e.g., `/register_birthday@YourBotUsername`).


### Date Input Formats

The bot accepts various date formats:
- `DD.MM.YYYY` (e.g., 15.06.1990)
- `DD.MM` (e.g., 15.06)
- `DD.MM AGE` (e.g., 15.06 25)

Example:

```
John Doe
15.06.1990
```

### Reminder Settings

Choose when to receive reminders:
- On the birthday (0 days)
- 1 day before
- 3 days before
- 7 days before

## 🛠 Technical Details

### Project Structure

```
birthday_reminder_bot/
├── bot.py # Main bot logic
├── db.py # Database operations
├── utils.py # Utility functions
├── tests.py # Unit tests
├── docker-compose.yml # Docker configuration
├── Dockerfile # Docker build instructions
└── requirements.txt # Python dependencies
```

### Database Schema

The bot uses SQLite with the following main tables:
- `birthdays` - Stores birthday information
- `user_reminder_settings` - User notification preferences
- `backup_ping_settings` - Automatic backup configurations

### Testing

Run the test suite:

```bash
python tests.py
```

## 🔐 Privacy & Security

- All data is stored locally in SQLite databases
- Each user's data is isolated by their chat ID
- No personal information is shared between users
- Automatic log rotation (30 days retention)

## 🤝 Contributing

Contributions are welcome! Here's how you can help:

1. Fork the repository
2. Create your feature branch (`git checkout -b feature/AmazingFeature`)
3. Commit your changes (`git commit -m 'Add some AmazingFeature'`)
4. Push to the branch (`git push origin feature/AmazingFeature`)
5. Open a Pull Request

### Development Setup

1. Install development dependencies:

```bash
pip install black isort flake8
```

2. Use the provided `start.sh` script for development:

```bash
./start.sh
```

## 📝 License

This project is licensed under the MIT License - see the [LICENSE](LICENSE) file for details.

## 🔧 Recent Updates

### 🌍 Internationalization Update (July 2025)

Added complete bilingual support for Russian and English:

- **🇬🇧🇷🇺 Dual Language Support**: Full Russian and English localization
- **🔄 Dynamic Switching**: Change language instantly with flag buttons
- **💾 Persistent Preferences**: Language choice saved automatically
- **📱 Complete UI Translation**: All buttons, messages, and notifications
- **📅 Localized Dates**: Month names and date formats in user's language
- **🛡️ Robust System**: Fallbacks and error handling for missing translations

### Critical Birthday Reminder Fix (July 2025)

Fixed a critical bug where birthday reminders would stop working after the first year:

- **Problem**: Reminder flags (`was_reminded_X_days_ago`) were never reset, causing reminders to stop permanently after being sent once
- **Solution**: Added automatic flag reset mechanism that runs every 5 minutes
- **Impact**: Ensures birthday reminders continue working year after year
- **Safety**: Added comprehensive tests to prevent similar issues in the future

### Database Backup System

Added robust backup system to protect user data:

- **Automatic Backups**: Created before every bot startup
- **Multiple Formats**: File copy, SQLite backup, and SQL dump
- **Easy Restore**: `python3 backup_db.py restore <backup_file>`

## 🙏 Acknowledgments

- [pyTelegramBotAPI](https://github.com/eternnoir/pyTelegramBotAPI) for the excellent Telegram bot framework
- The open-source community for inspiration and tools

## 📧 Contact

Telegram: [@pchelka_zh](https://t.me/pchelka_zh)

## 🚀 Future Plans

- [ ] Multi-language support
- [ ] Birthday statistics and analytics
- [ ] Export/Import functionality
- [ ] Web interface for management
- [ ] Group birthday notifications
